Let's talk about the effect of the Korean War, or
about the Korean War itself.
Why weren't you called into the Korean War? I was.
But I didn't go. Then why isn't it here? You were
called, but you didn't go? I got orders. Oh, tell me
about that. I'm full of these little strange
things. That's just after the time that I had
joined the 420th Engineer Brigade. Yeah, right. I
had joined the 420th Engineer Brigade shortly.
1951, yeah. Okay, and it seemed to me like it was
like in May or June, somewhere in the middle of the
summer. The war broke out in June 1950. Yeah, but
I'm... Korean War? Mm-hmm, mm-hmm. Well, anyhow,
I joined the 420th in, like, May or June of 51. Yeah.
And in November, I got orders to report to Fort
Belvoir, which was a Korean call. Okay. I knew that
I was not supposed to be called as an individual out
of an organized reserve unit. That was policy
then. They did not call individuals out of reserve
units for active duty. I knew it was a mistake. But
anyhow, I had this order to report to Fort Belvoir.
So I went on and went to Fort Hood and took my
physical. But in the meantime, I had applied to
Texas Military District to clarify my status. but
I wasn't really ready to go back on active duty. But
anyhow, the upshot of the whole thing was that when
the Adjutant General in Washington asked for
clarification on my status for recall, they
overlooked the order that I had been assigned to
the 420th Engineer Brigade. I see. So I wasn't
available for recall, and the order was revoked.
But I went so far as to take my physical to go to Fort
Belvoir. So when I got that resolved, well, that
took me completely out of the Korean War. I see. In
other words, if you would have not been assigned to
the 420, I think you would have... I would have been
in the Korean War. Mm-hmm. Yeah. Well, what were
your feelings about that, about not going? I
didn't want to get back in... in that skirmish over
there I really I really didn't want to go back on
active duty but first I was fulfilling my duty in a
reserve status and this was the time you know this
was this is the way you could fulfill your duty now
if the 420th had been called I had no compunction I
mean that that was my unit yeah but uh as an
individual I I didn't want to there's a you know you
just get kicked into a strange unit in combat or
wherever, you're sort of lost. Yeah. But the 420th
been called, I had not a word to say. Well, what were
your feelings? There were very few reserve units
called during the Korean War. What was your
feeling toward that? Did you think that Truman
should call up the reserves or should use draft or
should draft young men or what? Well, I was on a
panel up at the War College to discuss that
particular feature. Really? When was this? In the
1960s? No, this is when I went to the War College
here at,
up here, right here, 1969. 1969. Yeah. They had a
panel of reservists, and that question was posed
to the reservists as whether the whether the
morale of the reserves would have been enhanced or
whatever from calling reserve units to Korean War
or whether we thought we should not have been
called or whatever. The consensus of that panel
was that it was a mistake not to use the reserves for
what they were intended for. Not that anybody
wanted to go to combat. Not that anybody wanted to
get in the war. But they were paid for that. Tax
monies were used for that. And it was the consensus
of that group that the reserve program feels that
when a need is there, they ought to be used. Yeah.
And most of these then were other, at this
conference, were other reserve generals? That's
right. That's correct. In fact, it was a school, it
was a two-week conference for general officers.
So this panel was made up of reserve and National
Guard generals. And it was just about unanimous
opinion that they thought a mistake was made in not
utilizing reserves for what they were intended
for. And did you think the same with the Vietnam
War? Well, by that time, I had a little different
opinion of the Vietnam War because... Because
this was right during the heat of the Vietnam War in
1969. Well, that's right. And Johnson refused to
call up the reserves. That's right.
The Vietnam War and the Korean War were similar,
but I think we got into the Vietnam War a little bit
differently than we got in the Korean War. And for
that reason, I felt a little bit different about
the Korean War. I mean, yeah, the Vietnam War. But
the principle that we talked about, I think, still
held. I think when troops are needed, then they
ought to turn to the reserve. Because that's what
the reserve is for. And I just think that And any
time we have any kind of emergency, I just think
Johnson was just completely off base and not using
the reserves more than they were used. And I think
his was strictly political. He was strictly
political. And I don't think that kind of decision
needs to be made on a political basis. Well,
speaking of political and military decisions,
let's talk about your views on getting back to
Korea, back on the Korean War. What did you think of
the idea of a stalemate war? I don't think we ought
to ever get into one. We don't go in to win.
What did you think about the political decision to
fire General MacArthur? and not to strike the
bases, the Chinese bases north of the Yalu River,
and to continue a divided Korea? Well, I think that
MacArthur knew more about what we ought to do over
there than some of the politicians in Washington.
And I personally think that It's difficult to kill
an ant bed by catching them every time they come out
around the hole. I think you need to get in the hole
to get them. But I think MacArthur was wrong in
being insubordinate to his spirit, even though he
knew a heck of a lot more than his spirit did.
That situation has just grated on me ever since it
happened. And I'm terribly surprised that a man of
his military career would get into the situation
that he got into. Now, I think there are a lot of
things behind it. He was being sniped at by a lot of
people that didn't like him, who had an ear to the
president. I think that's without question. But
our military structure has always been built on
absolute devotion to duty, absolute
subordination to superiors. And I cannot, by any
means, support MacArthur or anybody else taking
the action that they did, from what I can read. I
don't know what was going on. I can see the reports.
But just a general idea. That's right. But I think
we ought to gone ask those boogers and got them out
of there. There was no way to win like we went. And I
totally agree with MacArthur that there's no
substitution for victory in war. You don't go into
war to push somebody back. You go into war to win the
dadgum thing. If you're going to get in the war, you
ought to go to win it. okay then let's let's relate
that to vietnam is that the way you felt about
vietnam that's right i don't think we ought to have
been there like we were that they let to my way of
thinking and again what i can read we went over
there to advise them whether that's really what we
went for or not i don't know but that's the role we
went with and then we had people there and we just
got involved in the darn thing but Here again, I
don't have any
feeling that we ought to have gone there without
trying to win it. Now, do you blame losing that war
on politicians or on the military? I don't know
which politicians.
And here again, rightfully so. I think our top...
Decision makers ought to be the civilians. I like
our system. But I think our military people did a
great job, but they had their hands tied behind
them. And I don't think we ought to go in any war
without swinging with both hands. I don't think
you can blame that on the military at all. At least I
don't.
Who do you think holds the power in America, then?
Who holds it? Do you think it's the people or do you
think it's the elites?
Well, it's the bigwigs in Washington and not
necessarily the elected bigwigs.
people that are ingrained up there that are
running that place, and I don't think it's all
congressional people. What do you mean? Who is it
then? Oh, it's the
appointed people that are in the civil service
jobs and the high echelons of appointed jobs. Of
course, see, they're not They're not subject to
the whims of people at all. The big high civil
service people and this sort of thing. We've got
too much of that, in my opinion. You can't touch
them.
Let's go back to your career. In the 1960s, all of a
sudden, You get all kinds of service schools. I
noticed you didn't have very much. Oh, from 44, you
have one. And then you don't have another one until
1962. But then from 62 to 69, it's just one right
after another. Well, two things. One, I
began to get in a more responsible job in the
military and in the highway department. I had more
latitude to go to those schools and I had more
desire to go because each one of them was enhancing
my education and my command abilities and there
were lots of opportunities to go. There was uh
that's during the time they were promoting the
reserves, and as I said a while ago, lots of
schools, lots of armories, lots of emphasis on the
reserve. And there was just lots of schools that
were available to me, and I took the opportunity to
go. It not only entailed travel over the United
States, but met and associated with many, many
people that I got as much out of as I did out of
school. Right. Right. What do you think were the
most important schools? I noticed you have
chemical and biological weapons. There were a few
of those schools that I was sort of expected to go
to. That chemical and biological out at Dugway was
one of them. About that time, the nerve gases and
the various
exotic... warfare techniques were coming into
prominence. They wanted us to know about them.
Another one is the police school over at, I
forgot what place it was now. You mean the
disturbance orientation course? Yeah. I was
going to ask you about that at Fort Gordon,
Georgia. Right. Yeah. That was during the times of
strikes and violence. That was a response, would
you say that was a response to the civil
disturbances of the mid-1960s? That's correct.
They were trying to educate the reserves to
fulfill their role in case they were needed. And
those schools were pretty much mandatory.
Mandatory for the leaders in the Army? Right,
that's correct. And they were established for
that purpose, for They are established by the
politicians or by the military? By the military to
deal with their role in foiling riots and handling
disturbances and this sort of thing. Well, tell me
about that. What did they teach you? Oh, they
taught you riot control. They taught you the
various chemicals that were available for riot
control. They taught you... many things where you
need to use restraints,
what to do in case of violence, what to do if people
had to be restrained and kept pinned up, so to
speak. And they just ran the gamut as far as those
things that you would do as a leader. to direct your
troops. Did they bring in military officers, or
did they bring in police who had been in these
riots? Both. Both. A lot of our instructors were
police who had been actually involved. As I
remember, one of our instructors was the police
commissioner of New York City. Yeah, he'd been
involved. Golly, you couldn't have found a person
who had more. actual experience, but they brought
in people that had actually been involved and told
you of things that had happened to them and how they
had handled them and policies and techniques and
procedures, and it was most interesting. Sounds
like that would be fascinating. What type of
people were these? I mean, the teachers, were
they, what could you describe them? Is there any
way that you could categorize all of these people?
Besides experienced? No. There were some
military. There were some military instructors
and then some of the, I'd say, outside PAC people.
But they were, I would call them professionals. I
can sure tell you that. Because the Army went out
and got the best that they could find. They did not
spare expense. And there were not only military
people in the school, there were outsiders, like
police chiefs and police commissioners. I mean,
there were students in the school, too, along with
military. Oh, students. Yes, along with
military. So community governments or city
governments would join up there with the
military. That's correct. That seems to be a much
better idea. Oh, it was. I thought it was great. The
concept of it was terrific. I'll tell you what it
made you wish that you never got involved in one of
those civil commotions because they can be most
frustrating. Yeah. And the main reason is you're
pitting the man that lives here against the man
that lives right over there. Yeah. If you've got a
reservist here and the man across the street is in a
civil commotion, this fellow has got in some cases
got to kill him hopefully not but here you're
pitting neighbors against neighbors and that
takes some trying now these this is 1969 these were
rather angry years did the instructors use much
rhetoric oh yeah they you know they they leveled
with you I mean they they didn't pull any punches In
fact, you got the feeling they were trying to scare
you to death. Really? About what? Scare you about
what? Well, the situations you could get in. Oh, I
see. And the importance of coolness and the
importance of using proper techniques and the
importance of not prolonging or provoking these
situations. You know, that's one of the most
important things in these deals is to do the thing
that you need to do to tend to cool it, but do it in a
manner that you don't provoke and prolong and make
it bigger and worse. And it doesn't take much in a
fit of fury, you know, to just blow the thing wide
open. Sure, sure. So they used... Well, they were,
they just didn't miss any opportunities, I tell
you for sure. Okay, let's go back to your military
career that night. You know, in every career,
highway department, teaching, or military
career, people feel that they had
accomplishments, and they also feel that there
were some things that they would have liked to
accomplish, but they just didn't have the time or
something, that there were some shortcomings.
What would you consider were the accomplishments
of your military career, especially in the
reserves over the last 10 or 20 years? The one big
thing that I look back with is a great deal of
satisfaction in the reserve.
At the time I was appointed brigade commander, we
had grown to where we were a unit to be reckoned
with. We were a significant part of the reserve
program.
Up till that time, we had been growing and we had
been getting a little bigger. We started out with a
little force of two, three hundred people. We
would work hard all during the year to aim at a
couple of weeks at summer camp. We'd get on a bus and
go to summer camp, and we'd listen to instruction,
or we'd watch demonstrations. And then as we got a
little bit more capable, we'd get on equipment,
and we'd get our hands dirty, so to speak. Up until
the time that I took over the brigade and went as a
whole to a summer camp, And we'd have to try to find
enough stuff for 400, 600, 1500 people to do
constructively at one location. And we went to
Walters Air Force Base four times. We went to Fort
Hood once. And we'd gone to Fort Polk about 10 or 11
times. We were just bulging them out at the seams.
We'd come in there with 1,500, 1,600 people and
have a real hard time finding work enough to keep
all that many people busy for two weeks and then
just pass out of the camp. So the first year that I
took over the brigade, we went back to Fort Polk.
And I, along with some of my staff officers, got to
looking at, are we doing all we can do to to promote
this unit and make it proficient and still do
something constructive for the Army
installations.
And I decided that we had outgrown a camp. We had
outgrown all going together. It was ideal because
you could see every one of your troops. You could
see all that they were doing. You could have a
parade. You could have a party, you know. So I
journeyed down to Fourth Army along with my
training officer and executive officer. And we
sat down with their training people and told them
of our concept that we had outgrown a one-unit
summer camp. And we proposed to them that we
diversify ourselves and go anywhere in the Fourth
Army that they could accommodate us at different
times and split this brigade up for summer camp and
let the staff officers of the brigade go and
satellite on these units and watch them operate,
supervise them, reconnoiter them, but operate
like we'd do if we were a brigade on active duty with
maybe a battalion over here and a separate company
off over here and a group up yonder and, you know,
just go here, there, and yonder where we could
really get some good work. And boy, they threw up a
hand and said, you can't do any such thing like
that. He said, you know, you've got to go where you
can look at your troops. And I said, look, we've got
capable staff officers that can go out and be the
listen and watch these units work. And I said, that
way for 12 months, we'll not sit in that armory over
there, but I'll send a couple of engineers to Fort
Bliss, and we'll get with a post engineer, and
we'll come up with things that this company can do
and that battalion can do and this one can do, and
we'll do the field work. We'll do the engineering
work. We'll do the plan work. And then when we get
ready to send them out there, all you've got to do is
furnish some money or to buy the materials, and if
we need to ship equipment, whatever. But we'll
send a contingent out there. Then we'll send
another one up to Fort Bliss, and another one to
Chaffee, and another one to Polk, and, you know,
wherever, and the whole Fourth Army. And they
thought that we had lost our minds. They said, you
can't control it. You can't, you can't, the thing
will just completely get away from you. And we
convinced them we could. And I mean, we did. And I
want you to read what this deputy Army commander
said in this final evaluation about that sort of
thing. But we convinced them. And the next year,
I'm telling you, we were all over the 4th Army area.
We sent people to the engineering, the diving
school at Fort Eustis, Virginia.
firefighters out to the A&M Fire School. We just
sent people wherever they needed to be and you
never saw morale rise in your life. They were so
tired of going to Fort Poles and running off out in
the woods and building the trail or building a
bridge or whatever and we just really had a ball and
We got more compliments from the Army staff about
that operation, and we did that for the full rest of
the time, and they're still doing it to a great
degree. So they're continuing this program now?
They have. It sold itself.